readme.md, before:

# Detecting Anomalies in Slant Total Electron Content

A collaboration between the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), 
Sapienza University of Rome, and the University of California - Los Angeles (UCLA). 

[![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/version-0.0.2-blue.svg)](https://github.com/vc1492a/sTEC-d-dt-Anomaly-Detection/archive/0.0.2.tar.gz)
[![Language](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.5%20%7C%203.6%20%7C%203.7%20%7C%203.8-blue)](#)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)

## Getting Started 

First, setup a Python virtual environment in which to install project 
dependencies and then install the library. First, pull the appropriate 
branch and then install: 

```
pip install . -e
```

Make sure to check out the `notebooks` and `data` directories 
which contain Jupyter notebooks with latest work and the source data 
used in the experiments. 

## Dependencies

This project requires that Python version is versioned between 3.5 and 
3.8. Requirements for the software, running tests, and notebooks are 
listed in `requirements.txt`, `requirements_ci.txt`, and `requirements_notebooks.txt`, 
and may be installed into a virtual environment in the following way: 

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
pip install -r requirements_ci.txt # for unit tests 
```

Some of the visualizations within the Jupyter notebooks require 
the [geos](https://trac.osgeo.org/geos/) library, which can be installed 
using homebrew:

```
brew install geos
```

Then, install the notebook dependencies: 

```
pip install -r requirements_notebooks.txt
```

## The Data

The data includes data from both a 2012 Hawaii tsunami event and 
a [2015 Chilean earthquake](https://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eventpage/us20003k7a/executive). 
Within the the `data` directory there is from each event, organized 
by subdirectories which correspond to the year and day of year. 

In every folder, you find a file for each satellite in view from a GPS 
station: so you have the value of the slant total electron content 
(sTEC) encountered by the GPS signal during its path in the ionosphere 
from the satellite (e.g G10) to the GPS receiver (e.g ahup) for every 
day.

The files have 7 columns:
- **Sod**: it represents the second of the day, it is my time array
- **dStec/dt**: the variations in time of the slant total electron 
content (the parameter of interest) epoch by epoch (it is like a velocity)
- **Lon**: longitude epoch by epoch of the IPP, the point to which we refer 
the sTEC estimations
- **Lat**: latitude epoch by epoch of the IPP, the point to which we refer 
the sTEC estimations
- **Hipp**: height epoch by epoch of the IPP, the point to which we refer 
the sTEC estimations
- **Azi**: the azimuth of the satellite epoch by epoch
- **Ele**: the elevation of the satellite epoch by epoch (usually we 
don’t consider data with elevation under 20 degrees since they are too 
noisy)

### Hawaii
 
The day of the earthquake is 302. We processed 5 days: two days before 
the earthquake (day 300 and 301), the day of the earthquake (302) and 
two days after the earthquake (303 and 304).

### Chile 

Only a day's worth of data is available for this event. 

## Contributing

Please use the issue tracker to report any erroneous behavior or desired 
feature requests. 

If you would like to contribute to development, please fork the repository and make 
any changes to a branch which corresponds to an open issue. Hot fixes 
and bug fixes can be represented by branches with the prefix `fix/` versus 
`feature/` for new capabilities or code improvements. Pull requests will 
then be made from these branches into the repository's `dev` branch 
prior to being pulled into `master`. Pull requests which are works in 
progress or ready for merging should be indicated by their respective 
prefixes (`[WIP]` and `[MRG]`). Pull requests with the `[MRG]` prefix will be 
reviewed prior to being pulled into the `master` branch. 

### Tests
When contributing, please ensure to run unit tests and add additional tests as 
necessary if adding new functionality. To run the unit tests, use `pytest`: 

```
python3 -m pytest --cov=src -vv
```

This should report the result of your unit tests as well as information 
about code coverage. 

### Versioning
[Semantic versioning](http://semver.org/) is used for this project. 
If contributing, please conform to semantic versioning guidelines when 
submitting a pull request. 

**NOTE**: Until relase to the [Python Package Index](https://pypi.org/) 
(PyPI), we will be incrementing version numbers _prior to_ `0.1.x`. The 
first release to the PyPI will be version `0.1`. 

### Updating the Changelog
Core contributors are responsible for maintaining `changelog.md` in 
coordination with new releases. 

### Releasing New Versions 

To release a new version of the software, simply tag the realse after building 
the distribution and wheels: 

```bash
python setup.py sdist bdist_wheel
git tag x.x.x -m 'some commit message here'
git push origin --tags <branch_name>
git add dist/
git push origin <branch_name>
```

## License
This project is licensed under the 
[Apache 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0) license.

## Research
If citing this work, use the following: 

```
# TBD
```

## References

### Motivation

* Real-Time Detection of Tsunami Ionospheric Disturbances with a 
Stand-Alone GNSS Receiver: A Preliminary Feasibility Demonstration. 
Savastano G., et. al.. Nature Scientific Reports, 2017. [PDF](https://www.nature.com/articles/srep46607.pdf).
* Detecting Spacecraft Anomalies Using LSTMs and Nonparametric Dynamic Thresholding. Hundman K., et. al. 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), 2018. [PDF](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3219819.3219845).

## Acknowledgements
- [University of California - Los Angeles (UCLA)](http://www.ucla.edu/)
    - [Dr. Jacob Bortnik](https://atmos.ucla.edu/people/faculty/jacob-bortnik)

Commit message:

updated instructions for GEOS installation

readme.md, after:

# Detecting Anomalies in Slant Total Electron Content

A collaboration between the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), 
Sapienza University of Rome, and the University of California - Los Angeles (UCLA). 

[![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/version-0.0.2-blue.svg)](https://github.com/vc1492a/sTEC-d-dt-Anomaly-Detection/archive/0.0.2.tar.gz)
[![Language](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.5%20%7C%203.6%20%7C%203.7%20%7C%203.8-blue)](#)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)

## Getting Started 

First, setup a Python virtual environment in which to install project 
dependencies and then install the library. First, pull the appropriate 
branch and then install: 

```
pip install . -e
```

Make sure to check out the `notebooks` and `data` directories 
which contain Jupyter notebooks with latest work and the source data 
used in the experiments. 

## Dependencies

This project requires that Python version is versioned between 3.5 and 
3.8. Requirements for the software, running tests, and notebooks are 
listed in `requirements.txt`, `requirements_ci.txt`, and `requirements_notebooks.txt`, 
and may be installed into a virtual environment in the following way: 

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
pip install -r requirements_ci.txt # for unit tests 
```

Some of the visualizations within the Jupyter notebooks require 
the [geos](https://trac.osgeo.org/geos/) library, which can be installed 
using homebrew on macOS:

```
brew install geos
```

On a linux machine, GEOS can be installed without root access if working 
in Anaconda environments: 

```
conda install -c anaconda geos
```

Then, install the notebook dependencies: 

```
pip install -r requirements_notebooks.txt
```

## The Data

The data includes data from both a 2012 Hawaii tsunami event and 
a [2015 Chilean earthquake](https://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eventpage/us20003k7a/executive). 
Within the the `data` directory there is from each event, organized 
by subdirectories which correspond to the year and day of year. 

In every folder, you find a file for each satellite in view from a GPS 
station: so you have the value of the slant total electron content 
(sTEC) encountered by the GPS signal during its path in the ionosphere 
from the satellite (e.g G10) to the GPS receiver (e.g ahup) for every 
day.

The files have 7 columns:
- **Sod**: it represents the second of the day, it is my time array
- **dStec/dt**: the variations in time of the slant total electron 
content (the parameter of interest) epoch by epoch (it is like a velocity)
- **Lon**: longitude epoch by epoch of the IPP, the point to which we refer 
the sTEC estimations
- **Lat**: latitude epoch by epoch of the IPP, the point to which we refer 
the sTEC estimations
- **Hipp**: height epoch by epoch of the IPP, the point to which we refer 
the sTEC estimations
- **Azi**: the azimuth of the satellite epoch by epoch
- **Ele**: the elevation of the satellite epoch by epoch (usually we 
don’t consider data with elevation under 20 degrees since they are too 
noisy)

### Hawaii
 
The day of the earthquake is 302. We processed 5 days: two days before 
the earthquake (day 300 and 301), the day of the earthquake (302) and 
two days after the earthquake (303 and 304).

### Chile 

Only a day's worth of data is available for this event. 

## Contributing

Please use the issue tracker to report any erroneous behavior or desired 
feature requests. 

If you would like to contribute to development, please fork the repository and make 
any changes to a branch which corresponds to an open issue. Hot fixes 
and bug fixes can be represented by branches with the prefix `fix/` versus 
`feature/` for new capabilities or code improvements. Pull requests will 
then be made from these branches into the repository's `dev` branch 
prior to being pulled into `master`. Pull requests which are works in 
progress or ready for merging should be indicated by their respective 
prefixes (`[WIP]` and `[MRG]`). Pull requests with the `[MRG]` prefix will be 
reviewed prior to being pulled into the `master` branch. 

### Tests
When contributing, please ensure to run unit tests and add additional tests as 
necessary if adding new functionality. To run the unit tests, use `pytest`: 

```
python3 -m pytest --cov=src -vv
```

This should report the result of your unit tests as well as information 
about code coverage. 

### Versioning
[Semantic versioning](http://semver.org/) is used for this project. 
If contributing, please conform to semantic versioning guidelines when 
submitting a pull request. 

**NOTE**: Until relase to the [Python Package Index](https://pypi.org/) 
(PyPI), we will be incrementing version numbers _prior to_ `0.1.x`. The 
first release to the PyPI will be version `0.1`. 

### Updating the Changelog
Core contributors are responsible for maintaining `changelog.md` in 
coordination with new releases. 

### Releasing New Versions 

To release a new version of the software, simply tag the realse after building 
the distribution and wheels: 

```bash
python setup.py sdist bdist_wheel
git tag x.x.x -m 'some commit message here'
git push origin --tags <branch_name>
git add dist/
git push origin <branch_name>
```

## License
This project is licensed under the 
[Apache 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0) license.

## Research
If citing this work, use the following: 

```
# TBD
```

## References

### Motivation

* Real-Time Detection of Tsunami Ionospheric Disturbances with a 
Stand-Alone GNSS Receiver: A Preliminary Feasibility Demonstration. 
Savastano G., et. al.. Nature Scientific Reports, 2017. [PDF](https://www.nature.com/articles/srep46607.pdf).
* Detecting Spacecraft Anomalies Using LSTMs and Nonparametric Dynamic Thresholding. Hundman K., et. al. 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), 2018. [PDF](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3219819.3219845).

## Acknowledgements
- [University of California - Los Angeles (UCLA)](http://www.ucla.edu/)
    - [Dr. Jacob Bortnik](https://atmos.ucla.edu/people/faculty/jacob-bortnik)
